docs/plugin.md, before:

---
summary: "Clawdbot plugins/extensions: discovery, config, and safety"
read_when:
  - Adding or modifying plugins/extensions
  - Documenting plugin install or load rules
---
# Plugins (Extensions)

## Quick start (new to plugins?)

A plugin is just a **small code module** that extends Clawdbot with extra
features (commands, tools, and Gateway RPC).

Most of the time, you’ll use plugins when you want a feature that’s not built
into core Clawdbot yet (or you want to keep optional features out of your main
install).

Fast path:

1) See what’s already loaded:

```bash
clawdbot plugins list
```

2) Install an official plugin (example: Voice Call):

```bash
clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/voice-call
```

3) Restart the Gateway, then configure under `plugins.entries.<id>.config`.

See [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) for a concrete example plugin.

## Available plugins (official)

- Microsoft Teams is plugin-only as of 2026.1.15; install `@clawdbot/msteams` if you use Teams.
- [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) — `@clawdbot/voice-call`
- [Zalo Personal](/plugins/zalouser) — `@clawdbot/zalouser`
- [Matrix](/channels/matrix) — `@clawdbot/matrix`
- [Zalo](/channels/zalo) — `@clawdbot/zalo`
- [Microsoft Teams](/channels/msteams) — `@clawdbot/msteams`
- Google Antigravity OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `google-antigravity-auth` (disabled by default)
- Gemini CLI OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `google-gemini-cli-auth` (disabled by default)
- Qwen OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `qwen-portal-auth` (disabled by default)
- Copilot Proxy (provider auth) — bundled as `copilot-proxy` (disabled by default)

Clawdbot plugins are **TypeScript modules** loaded at runtime via jiti. They can
register:

- Gateway RPC methods
- Gateway HTTP handlers
- Agent tools
- CLI commands
- Background services
- Optional config validation

Plugins run **in‑process** with the Gateway, so treat them as trusted code.

## Discovery & precedence

Clawdbot scans, in order:

1) Config paths
- `plugins.load.paths` (file or directory)

2) Workspace extensions
- `<workspace>/.clawdbot/extensions/*.ts`
- `<workspace>/.clawdbot/extensions/*/index.ts`

3) Global extensions
- `~/.clawdbot/extensions/*.ts`
- `~/.clawdbot/extensions/*/index.ts`

4) Bundled extensions (shipped with Clawdbot, **disabled by default**)
- `<clawdbot>/extensions/*`

Bundled plugins must be enabled explicitly via `plugins.entries.<id>.enabled`
or `clawdbot plugins enable <id>`. Installed plugins are enabled by default,
but can be disabled the same way.

If multiple plugins resolve to the same id, the first match in the order above
wins and lower-precedence copies are ignored.

### Package packs

A plugin directory may include a `package.json` with `clawdbot.extensions`:

```json
{
  "name": "my-pack",
  "clawdbot": {
    "extensions": ["./src/safety.ts", "./src/tools.ts"]
  }
}
```

Each entry becomes a plugin. If the pack lists multiple extensions, the plugin id
becomes `name/<fileBase>`.

If your plugin imports npm deps, install them in that directory so
`node_modules` is available (`npm install` / `pnpm install`).

## Plugin IDs

Default plugin ids:

- Package packs: `package.json` `name`
- Standalone file: file base name (`~/.../voice-call.ts` → `voice-call`)

If a plugin exports `id`, Clawdbot uses it but warns when it doesn’t match the
configured id.

## Config

```json5
{
  plugins: {
    enabled: true,
    allow: ["voice-call"],
    deny: ["untrusted-plugin"],
    load: { paths: ["~/Projects/oss/voice-call-extension"] },
    entries: {
      "voice-call": { enabled: true, config: { provider: "twilio" } }
    }
  }
}
```

Fields:
- `enabled`: master toggle (default: true)
- `allow`: allowlist (optional)
- `deny`: denylist (optional; deny wins)
- `load.paths`: extra plugin files/dirs
- `entries.<id>`: per‑plugin toggles + config

Config changes **require a gateway restart**.

## Control UI (schema + labels)

The Control UI uses `config.schema` (JSON Schema + `uiHints`) to render better forms.

Clawdbot augments `uiHints` at runtime based on discovered plugins:

- Adds per-plugin labels for `plugins.entries.<id>` / `.enabled` / `.config`
- Merges optional plugin-provided config field hints under:
  `plugins.entries.<id>.config.<field>`

If you want your plugin config fields to show good labels/placeholders (and mark secrets as sensitive),
provide `configSchema.uiHints`.

Example:

```ts
export default {
  id: "my-plugin",
  configSchema: {
    parse: (v) => v,
    uiHints: {
      "apiKey": { label: "API Key", sensitive: true },
      "region": { label: "Region", placeholder: "us-east-1" },
    },
  },
  register(api) {},
};
```

## CLI

```bash
clawdbot plugins list
clawdbot plugins info <id>
clawdbot plugins install <path>                 # copy a local file/dir into ~/.clawdbot/extensions/<id>
clawdbot plugins install ./extensions/voice-call # relative path ok
clawdbot plugins install ./plugin.tgz           # install from a local tarball
clawdbot plugins install ./plugin.zip           # install from a local zip
clawdbot plugins install -l ./extensions/voice-call # link (no copy) for dev
clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/voice-call # install from npm
clawdbot plugins update <id>
clawdbot plugins update --all
clawdbot plugins enable <id>
clawdbot plugins disable <id>
clawdbot plugins doctor
```

`plugins update` only works for npm installs tracked under `plugins.installs`.

Plugins may also register their own top‑level commands (example: `clawdbot voicecall`).

## Plugin API (overview)

Plugins export either:

- A function: `(api) => { ... }`
- An object: `{ id, name, configSchema, register(api) { ... } }`

## Provider plugins (model auth)

Plugins can register **model provider auth** flows so users can run OAuth or
API-key setup inside Clawdbot (no external scripts needed).

Register a provider via `api.registerProvider(...)`. Each provider exposes one
or more auth methods (OAuth, API key, device code, etc.). These methods power:

- `clawdbot models auth login --provider <id> [--method <id>]`

Example:

```ts
api.registerProvider({
  id: "acme",
  label: "AcmeAI",
  auth: [
    {
      id: "oauth",
      label: "OAuth",
      kind: "oauth",
      run: async (ctx) => {
        // Run OAuth flow and return auth profiles.
        return {
          profiles: [
            {
              profileId: "acme:default",
              credential: {
                type: "oauth",
                provider: "acme",
                access: "...",
                refresh: "...",
                expires: Date.now() + 3600 * 1000,
              },
            },
          ],
          defaultModel: "acme/opus-1",
        };
      },
    },
  ],
});
```

Notes:
- `run` receives a `ProviderAuthContext` with `prompter`, `runtime`,
  `openUrl`, and `oauth.createVpsAwareHandlers` helpers.
- Return `configPatch` when you need to add default models or provider config.
- Return `defaultModel` so `--set-default` can update agent defaults.

### Register a messaging channel

Plugins can register **channel plugins** that behave like built‑in channels
(WhatsApp, Telegram, etc.). Channel config lives under `channels.<id>` and is
validated by your channel plugin code.

```ts
const myChannel = {
  id: "acmechat",
  meta: {
    id: "acmechat",
    label: "AcmeChat",
    selectionLabel: "AcmeChat (API)",
    docsPath: "/channels/acmechat",
    blurb: "demo channel plugin.",
    aliases: ["acme"],
  },
  capabilities: { chatTypes: ["direct"] },
  config: {
    listAccountIds: (cfg) => Object.keys(cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts ?? {}),
    resolveAccount: (cfg, accountId) =>
      (cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts?.[accountId ?? "default"] ?? { accountId }),
  },
  outbound: {
    deliveryMode: "direct",
    sendText: async () => ({ ok: true }),
  },
};

export default function (api) {
  api.registerChannel({ plugin: myChannel });
}
```

Notes:
- Put config under `channels.<id>` (not `plugins.entries`).
- `meta.label` is used for labels in CLI/UI lists.
- `meta.aliases` adds alternate ids for normalization and CLI inputs.

### Write a new messaging channel (step‑by‑step)

Use this when you want a **new chat surface** (a “messaging channel”), not a model provider.
Model provider docs live under `/providers/*`.

1) Pick an id + config shape
- All channel config lives under `channels.<id>`.
- Prefer `channels.<id>.accounts.<accountId>` for multi‑account setups.

2) Define the channel metadata
- `meta.label`, `meta.selectionLabel`, `meta.docsPath`, `meta.blurb` control CLI/UI lists.
- `meta.docsPath` should point at a docs page like `/channels/<id>`.

3) Implement the required adapters
- `config.listAccountIds` + `config.resolveAccount`
- `capabilities` (chat types, media, threads, etc.)
- `outbound.deliveryMode` + `outbound.sendText` (for basic send)

4) Add optional adapters as needed
- `setup` (wizard), `security` (DM policy), `status` (health/diagnostics)
- `gateway` (start/stop/login), `mentions`, `threading`, `streaming`
- `actions` (message actions), `commands` (native command behavior)

5) Register the channel in your plugin
- `api.registerChannel({ plugin })`

Minimal config example:

```json5
{
  channels: {
    acmechat: {
      accounts: {
        default: { token: "ACME_TOKEN", enabled: true }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Minimal channel plugin (outbound‑only):

```ts
const plugin = {
  id: "acmechat",
  meta: {
    id: "acmechat",
    label: "AcmeChat",
    selectionLabel: "AcmeChat (API)",
    docsPath: "/channels/acmechat",
    blurb: "AcmeChat messaging channel.",
    aliases: ["acme"],
  },
  capabilities: { chatTypes: ["direct"] },
  config: {
    listAccountIds: (cfg) => Object.keys(cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts ?? {}),
    resolveAccount: (cfg, accountId) =>
      (cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts?.[accountId ?? "default"] ?? { accountId }),
  },
  outbound: {
    deliveryMode: "direct",
    sendText: async ({ text }) => {
      // deliver `text` to your channel here
      return { ok: true };
    },
  },
};

export default function (api) {
  api.registerChannel({ plugin });
}
```

Load the plugin (extensions dir or `plugins.load.paths`), restart the gateway,
then configure `channels.<id>` in your config.

### Register a tool

```ts
import { Type } from "@sinclair/typebox";

export default function (api) {
  api.registerTool({
    name: "my_tool",
    description: "Do a thing",
    parameters: Type.Object({
      input: Type.String(),
    }),
    async execute(_id, params) {
      return { content: [{ type: "text", text: params.input }] };
    },
  });
}
```

### Register a gateway RPC method

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerGatewayMethod("myplugin.status", ({ respond }) => {
    respond(true, { ok: true });
  });
}
```

### Register CLI commands

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerCli(({ program }) => {
    program.command("mycmd").action(() => {
      console.log("Hello");
    });
  }, { commands: ["mycmd"] });
}
```

### Register background services

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerService({
    id: "my-service",
    start: () => api.logger.info("ready"),
    stop: () => api.logger.info("bye"),
  });
}
```

## Naming conventions

- Gateway methods: `pluginId.action` (example: `voicecall.status`)
- Tools: `snake_case` (example: `voice_call`)
- CLI commands: kebab or camel, but avoid clashing with core commands

## Skills

Plugins can ship a skill in the repo (`skills/<name>/SKILL.md`).
Enable it with `plugins.entries.<id>.enabled` (or other config gates) and ensure
it’s present in your workspace/managed skills locations.

## Distribution (npm)

Recommended packaging:

- Main package: `clawdbot` (this repo)
- Plugins: separate npm packages under `@clawdbot/*` (example: `@clawdbot/voice-call`)

Publishing contract:

- Plugin `package.json` must include `clawdbot.extensions` with one or more entry files.
- Entry files can be `.js` or `.ts` (jiti loads TS at runtime).
- `clawdbot plugins install <npm-spec>` uses `npm pack`, extracts into `~/.clawdbot/extensions/<id>/`, and enables it in config.
- Config key stability: scoped packages are normalized to the **unscoped** id for `plugins.entries.*`.

## Example plugin: Voice Call

This repo includes a voice‑call plugin (Twilio or log fallback):

- Source: `extensions/voice-call`
- Skill: `skills/voice-call`
- CLI: `clawdbot voicecall start|status`
- Tool: `voice_call`
- RPC: `voicecall.start`, `voicecall.status`
- Config (twilio): `provider: "twilio"` + `twilio.accountSid/authToken/from` (optional `statusCallbackUrl`, `twimlUrl`)
- Config (dev): `provider: "log"` (no network)

See [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) and `extensions/voice-call/README.md` for setup and usage.

## Safety notes

Plugins run in-process with the Gateway. Treat them as trusted code:

- Only install plugins you trust.
- Prefer `plugins.allow` allowlists.
- Restart the Gateway after changes.

## Testing plugins

Plugins can (and should) ship tests:

- In-repo plugins can keep Vitest tests under `src/**` (example: `src/plugins/voice-call.plugin.test.ts`).
- Separately published plugins should run their own CI (lint/build/test) and validate `clawdbot.extensions` points at the built entrypoint (`dist/index.js`).

Commit message:

feat(plugins): add memory slot plugin

docs/plugin.md, after:

---
summary: "Clawdbot plugins/extensions: discovery, config, and safety"
read_when:
  - Adding or modifying plugins/extensions
  - Documenting plugin install or load rules
---
# Plugins (Extensions)

## Quick start (new to plugins?)

A plugin is just a **small code module** that extends Clawdbot with extra
features (commands, tools, and Gateway RPC).

Most of the time, you’ll use plugins when you want a feature that’s not built
into core Clawdbot yet (or you want to keep optional features out of your main
install).

Fast path:

1) See what’s already loaded:

```bash
clawdbot plugins list
```

2) Install an official plugin (example: Voice Call):

```bash
clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/voice-call
```

3) Restart the Gateway, then configure under `plugins.entries.<id>.config`.

See [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) for a concrete example plugin.

## Available plugins (official)

- Microsoft Teams is plugin-only as of 2026.1.15; install `@clawdbot/msteams` if you use Teams.
- Memory (Core) — bundled memory search plugin (enabled by default via `plugins.slots.memory`)
- [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) — `@clawdbot/voice-call`
- [Zalo Personal](/plugins/zalouser) — `@clawdbot/zalouser`
- [Matrix](/channels/matrix) — `@clawdbot/matrix`
- [Zalo](/channels/zalo) — `@clawdbot/zalo`
- [Microsoft Teams](/channels/msteams) — `@clawdbot/msteams`
- Google Antigravity OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `google-antigravity-auth` (disabled by default)
- Gemini CLI OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `google-gemini-cli-auth` (disabled by default)
- Qwen OAuth (provider auth) — bundled as `qwen-portal-auth` (disabled by default)
- Copilot Proxy (provider auth) — bundled as `copilot-proxy` (disabled by default)

Clawdbot plugins are **TypeScript modules** loaded at runtime via jiti. They can
register:

- Gateway RPC methods
- Gateway HTTP handlers
- Agent tools
- CLI commands
- Background services
- Optional config validation

Plugins run **in‑process** with the Gateway, so treat them as trusted code.

## Discovery & precedence

Clawdbot scans, in order:

1) Config paths
- `plugins.load.paths` (file or directory)

2) Workspace extensions
- `<workspace>/.clawdbot/extensions/*.ts`
- `<workspace>/.clawdbot/extensions/*/index.ts`

3) Global extensions
- `~/.clawdbot/extensions/*.ts`
- `~/.clawdbot/extensions/*/index.ts`

4) Bundled extensions (shipped with Clawdbot, **disabled by default**)
- `<clawdbot>/extensions/*`

Bundled plugins must be enabled explicitly via `plugins.entries.<id>.enabled`
or `clawdbot plugins enable <id>`. Installed plugins are enabled by default,
but can be disabled the same way.

If multiple plugins resolve to the same id, the first match in the order above
wins and lower-precedence copies are ignored.

### Package packs

A plugin directory may include a `package.json` with `clawdbot.extensions`:

```json
{
  "name": "my-pack",
  "clawdbot": {
    "extensions": ["./src/safety.ts", "./src/tools.ts"]
  }
}
```

Each entry becomes a plugin. If the pack lists multiple extensions, the plugin id
becomes `name/<fileBase>`.

If your plugin imports npm deps, install them in that directory so
`node_modules` is available (`npm install` / `pnpm install`).

## Plugin IDs

Default plugin ids:

- Package packs: `package.json` `name`
- Standalone file: file base name (`~/.../voice-call.ts` → `voice-call`)

If a plugin exports `id`, Clawdbot uses it but warns when it doesn’t match the
configured id.

## Config

```json5
{
  plugins: {
    enabled: true,
    allow: ["voice-call"],
    deny: ["untrusted-plugin"],
    load: { paths: ["~/Projects/oss/voice-call-extension"] },
    entries: {
      "voice-call": { enabled: true, config: { provider: "twilio" } }
    }
  }
}
```

Fields:
- `enabled`: master toggle (default: true)
- `allow`: allowlist (optional)
- `deny`: denylist (optional; deny wins)
- `load.paths`: extra plugin files/dirs
- `entries.<id>`: per‑plugin toggles + config

Config changes **require a gateway restart**.

## Plugin slots (exclusive categories)

Some plugin categories are **exclusive** (only one active at a time). Use
`plugins.slots` to select which plugin owns the slot:

```json5
{
  plugins: {
    slots: {
      memory: "memory-core" // or "none" to disable memory plugins
    }
  }
}
```

If multiple plugins declare `kind: "memory"`, only the selected one loads. Others
are disabled with diagnostics.

## Control UI (schema + labels)

The Control UI uses `config.schema` (JSON Schema + `uiHints`) to render better forms.

Clawdbot augments `uiHints` at runtime based on discovered plugins:

- Adds per-plugin labels for `plugins.entries.<id>` / `.enabled` / `.config`
- Merges optional plugin-provided config field hints under:
  `plugins.entries.<id>.config.<field>`

If you want your plugin config fields to show good labels/placeholders (and mark secrets as sensitive),
provide `configSchema.uiHints`.

Example:

```ts
export default {
  id: "my-plugin",
  configSchema: {
    parse: (v) => v,
    uiHints: {
      "apiKey": { label: "API Key", sensitive: true },
      "region": { label: "Region", placeholder: "us-east-1" },
    },
  },
  register(api) {},
};
```

## CLI

```bash
clawdbot plugins list
clawdbot plugins info <id>
clawdbot plugins install <path>                 # copy a local file/dir into ~/.clawdbot/extensions/<id>
clawdbot plugins install ./extensions/voice-call # relative path ok
clawdbot plugins install ./plugin.tgz           # install from a local tarball
clawdbot plugins install ./plugin.zip           # install from a local zip
clawdbot plugins install -l ./extensions/voice-call # link (no copy) for dev
clawdbot plugins install @clawdbot/voice-call # install from npm
clawdbot plugins update <id>
clawdbot plugins update --all
clawdbot plugins enable <id>
clawdbot plugins disable <id>
clawdbot plugins doctor
```

`plugins update` only works for npm installs tracked under `plugins.installs`.

Plugins may also register their own top‑level commands (example: `clawdbot voicecall`).

## Plugin API (overview)

Plugins export either:

- A function: `(api) => { ... }`
- An object: `{ id, name, configSchema, register(api) { ... } }`

## Provider plugins (model auth)

Plugins can register **model provider auth** flows so users can run OAuth or
API-key setup inside Clawdbot (no external scripts needed).

Register a provider via `api.registerProvider(...)`. Each provider exposes one
or more auth methods (OAuth, API key, device code, etc.). These methods power:

- `clawdbot models auth login --provider <id> [--method <id>]`

Example:

```ts
api.registerProvider({
  id: "acme",
  label: "AcmeAI",
  auth: [
    {
      id: "oauth",
      label: "OAuth",
      kind: "oauth",
      run: async (ctx) => {
        // Run OAuth flow and return auth profiles.
        return {
          profiles: [
            {
              profileId: "acme:default",
              credential: {
                type: "oauth",
                provider: "acme",
                access: "...",
                refresh: "...",
                expires: Date.now() + 3600 * 1000,
              },
            },
          ],
          defaultModel: "acme/opus-1",
        };
      },
    },
  ],
});
```

Notes:
- `run` receives a `ProviderAuthContext` with `prompter`, `runtime`,
  `openUrl`, and `oauth.createVpsAwareHandlers` helpers.
- Return `configPatch` when you need to add default models or provider config.
- Return `defaultModel` so `--set-default` can update agent defaults.

### Register a messaging channel

Plugins can register **channel plugins** that behave like built‑in channels
(WhatsApp, Telegram, etc.). Channel config lives under `channels.<id>` and is
validated by your channel plugin code.

```ts
const myChannel = {
  id: "acmechat",
  meta: {
    id: "acmechat",
    label: "AcmeChat",
    selectionLabel: "AcmeChat (API)",
    docsPath: "/channels/acmechat",
    blurb: "demo channel plugin.",
    aliases: ["acme"],
  },
  capabilities: { chatTypes: ["direct"] },
  config: {
    listAccountIds: (cfg) => Object.keys(cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts ?? {}),
    resolveAccount: (cfg, accountId) =>
      (cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts?.[accountId ?? "default"] ?? { accountId }),
  },
  outbound: {
    deliveryMode: "direct",
    sendText: async () => ({ ok: true }),
  },
};

export default function (api) {
  api.registerChannel({ plugin: myChannel });
}
```

Notes:
- Put config under `channels.<id>` (not `plugins.entries`).
- `meta.label` is used for labels in CLI/UI lists.
- `meta.aliases` adds alternate ids for normalization and CLI inputs.

### Write a new messaging channel (step‑by‑step)

Use this when you want a **new chat surface** (a “messaging channel”), not a model provider.
Model provider docs live under `/providers/*`.

1) Pick an id + config shape
- All channel config lives under `channels.<id>`.
- Prefer `channels.<id>.accounts.<accountId>` for multi‑account setups.

2) Define the channel metadata
- `meta.label`, `meta.selectionLabel`, `meta.docsPath`, `meta.blurb` control CLI/UI lists.
- `meta.docsPath` should point at a docs page like `/channels/<id>`.

3) Implement the required adapters
- `config.listAccountIds` + `config.resolveAccount`
- `capabilities` (chat types, media, threads, etc.)
- `outbound.deliveryMode` + `outbound.sendText` (for basic send)

4) Add optional adapters as needed
- `setup` (wizard), `security` (DM policy), `status` (health/diagnostics)
- `gateway` (start/stop/login), `mentions`, `threading`, `streaming`
- `actions` (message actions), `commands` (native command behavior)

5) Register the channel in your plugin
- `api.registerChannel({ plugin })`

Minimal config example:

```json5
{
  channels: {
    acmechat: {
      accounts: {
        default: { token: "ACME_TOKEN", enabled: true }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Minimal channel plugin (outbound‑only):

```ts
const plugin = {
  id: "acmechat",
  meta: {
    id: "acmechat",
    label: "AcmeChat",
    selectionLabel: "AcmeChat (API)",
    docsPath: "/channels/acmechat",
    blurb: "AcmeChat messaging channel.",
    aliases: ["acme"],
  },
  capabilities: { chatTypes: ["direct"] },
  config: {
    listAccountIds: (cfg) => Object.keys(cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts ?? {}),
    resolveAccount: (cfg, accountId) =>
      (cfg.channels?.acmechat?.accounts?.[accountId ?? "default"] ?? { accountId }),
  },
  outbound: {
    deliveryMode: "direct",
    sendText: async ({ text }) => {
      // deliver `text` to your channel here
      return { ok: true };
    },
  },
};

export default function (api) {
  api.registerChannel({ plugin });
}
```

Load the plugin (extensions dir or `plugins.load.paths`), restart the gateway,
then configure `channels.<id>` in your config.

### Register a tool

```ts
import { Type } from "@sinclair/typebox";

export default function (api) {
  api.registerTool({
    name: "my_tool",
    description: "Do a thing",
    parameters: Type.Object({
      input: Type.String(),
    }),
    async execute(_id, params) {
      return { content: [{ type: "text", text: params.input }] };
    },
  });
}
```

### Register a gateway RPC method

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerGatewayMethod("myplugin.status", ({ respond }) => {
    respond(true, { ok: true });
  });
}
```

### Register CLI commands

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerCli(({ program }) => {
    program.command("mycmd").action(() => {
      console.log("Hello");
    });
  }, { commands: ["mycmd"] });
}
```

### Register background services

```ts
export default function (api) {
  api.registerService({
    id: "my-service",
    start: () => api.logger.info("ready"),
    stop: () => api.logger.info("bye"),
  });
}
```

## Naming conventions

- Gateway methods: `pluginId.action` (example: `voicecall.status`)
- Tools: `snake_case` (example: `voice_call`)
- CLI commands: kebab or camel, but avoid clashing with core commands

## Skills

Plugins can ship a skill in the repo (`skills/<name>/SKILL.md`).
Enable it with `plugins.entries.<id>.enabled` (or other config gates) and ensure
it’s present in your workspace/managed skills locations.

## Distribution (npm)

Recommended packaging:

- Main package: `clawdbot` (this repo)
- Plugins: separate npm packages under `@clawdbot/*` (example: `@clawdbot/voice-call`)

Publishing contract:

- Plugin `package.json` must include `clawdbot.extensions` with one or more entry files.
- Entry files can be `.js` or `.ts` (jiti loads TS at runtime).
- `clawdbot plugins install <npm-spec>` uses `npm pack`, extracts into `~/.clawdbot/extensions/<id>/`, and enables it in config.
- Config key stability: scoped packages are normalized to the **unscoped** id for `plugins.entries.*`.

## Example plugin: Voice Call

This repo includes a voice‑call plugin (Twilio or log fallback):

- Source: `extensions/voice-call`
- Skill: `skills/voice-call`
- CLI: `clawdbot voicecall start|status`
- Tool: `voice_call`
- RPC: `voicecall.start`, `voicecall.status`
- Config (twilio): `provider: "twilio"` + `twilio.accountSid/authToken/from` (optional `statusCallbackUrl`, `twimlUrl`)
- Config (dev): `provider: "log"` (no network)

See [Voice Call](/plugins/voice-call) and `extensions/voice-call/README.md` for setup and usage.

## Safety notes

Plugins run in-process with the Gateway. Treat them as trusted code:

- Only install plugins you trust.
- Prefer `plugins.allow` allowlists.
- Restart the Gateway after changes.

## Testing plugins

Plugins can (and should) ship tests:

- In-repo plugins can keep Vitest tests under `src/**` (example: `src/plugins/voice-call.plugin.test.ts`).
- Separately published plugins should run their own CI (lint/build/test) and validate `clawdbot.extensions` points at the built entrypoint (`dist/index.js`).
